# INFLUENCE OF DRUG-POLYMER INTERACTIONS ON RELEASE KINETICS OF PLGA AND PLA/PEG NPS

Merve Gul¹˒², Ida Genta¹, Maria M. Perez Madrigal², Carlos Aleman²˒³, Enrica Chiesa¹

¹Department of Drug Sciences, University of Pavia  
²Department of Chemical Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-EEBE)  
³Barcelona Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, EEBE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya

15-17 May | Bari, Italy

## INTRODUCTION

Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing global health threat, requiring novel drug delivery strategies (1). Microfluidic-based synthesis of nano-sized carriers for drug delivery systems (NDDS) offers precise control over nanocarrier characteristics and improves encapsulation efficiency (2,3).

(1) ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE

Bacteria

1. Efflux Pump
2. Drug Inhibition
3. Mutation of Binding Sides

(2) NPs SYNTHESIS BY MICROFLUIDICS

Y-Shape Microfluidic Chip

PLGA (L:G 50:50)
Mw: 66 kDa

PLA/PEG (L:mPEG 75:25)
Mw: 31 kDa

Hydrophobic Drug (Curcumin – CURC)

(3) DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM

CURC loaded NPs
NPs coating to skin patches
Release of NPs
Release of CURC
Infected area

## METHODS

• An ad hoc custom-built device was used, comprising a pumping module with two syringe pumps and an infusion setup designed to place a Passive Herringbone Mixer (PHBM) chip.

Figure 1: Representative scheme of a) outer and b) inner side of microfluidic chip (3).

Table 1: Drug loading into NPs and micelles.

| Type of Syringes | Final Volume (mL) | Total Flow Rate (TFR) (mL/min) | Flow Rate Ratio (FRR) (aqueous/organic phase) |
|------------------|-------------------|-------------------------------|-----------------------------------------------|
| PLGA NPs | Terumo 5 mL | 2 | 8 | 4:1 |
| | Terumo 5 mL | 2 | 8 | 4:1 |
| PLA/PEG NPs | Terumo 5 mL | 2 | 3 | 3:1 |
| | Terumo 5 mL | 2 | 3 | 3:1 |

## RESULTS

1. Physical Properties of NPs

• NPs had uniform size distribution with PDI ≤ 0.2, consistent with TEM observations.

Figure 2: Physical features of PLGA NPs and PLA/PEG micelles.

Figure 3: TEM images of a) PLGA NPs, b) CURC loaded PLGA NPs, c) PLA-PEG micelles, and d) CURC loaded PLA-PEG micelles.

2. Release Kinetics of NPs

Table 2: Drug loading into NPs and micelles.

| Loading | PLGA | PLA/PEG |
|---------|------|---------|
| EE % | | |
| Curcumin | 61.91 ± 1.86 | 13.74 ± 0.97 |
| Payload (% µg/mg) | | |
| | 2.81 ± 0.81 | 2.51 ± 0.57 |

Higher Encapsulation Efficiency (EE%)

Figure 4: Release profiles of CURC from PLGA NPs and PLA/PEG micelles.

Slower Release Rate

3. Cytotoxicity & Antimicrobial Activity

Figure 5: Cell viability (%) after 24 h treatment on NHDFs at a cell density of 3 × 10⁸ cells/mL.

Figure 6: Bacterial reduction of S.epidermidis after 72h of treatment with CURC loaded PLGA NPs with a MIC of 0.1 mg/mL.

Figure 7: Fluorescence microscope images of placebo and CURC loaded PLGA NPs on NHDFs after 2, 4 and 24 h indicating cellular uptake.

## CONCLUSION

• CURC loaded PLGA NPs were better candidates for controlled drug delivery due to hydrophobic interactions between the drug and the polymer.

• No or slight cytotoxic effect of CURC NPs was observed on NHDFs with progressive cellular internalization of NPs.

• The choice of polymer composition plays a key role in drug-polymer interactions and release kinetics to achieve more controlled delivery and improved therapeutic efficacy in regenerative medicine.

## References

(1) Vega-Vásquez, P. et al. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 2296-4185.
(2) Fu, Y. S. et al. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2021, 141, 111888.
(3) Chiesa et al., International Journal of Pharmaceutics, Volume 629, 2022, 122368, ISSN 0378-5173.

## Acknowledgements

"This project has received funding from the European Union's research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101072645".
