15-17 May | Bari, Italy
INFLUENCE OF DRUG-POLYMER INTERACTIONS ON RELEASE KINETICS OF PLGA AND PLA/PEG NPS
Merve Gul 1,2 , Ida Genta 1 , Maria M. Perez Madrigal 2 , Carlos Aleman 2,3 , Enrica Chiesa 1
1 Department of Drug Sciences, University of Pavia 2 Department of Chemical Engineering, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya (UPC-EEBE) 3 Barcelona Research Center for Multiscale Science and Engineering, EEBE, Universitat Politècnica de Catalunya
INTRODUCTION RESULTS
Antimicrobial resistance (AMR) is a growing global health threat, requiring novel drug
delivery strategies (1). Microfluidic-based synthesis of nano-sized carriers for drug delivery
systems (NDDS) offers precise control over nanocarrier characteristics and improves
encapsulation efficiency (2,3).
(1) ANTIMICROBIAL RESISTANCE
Bacteria
1. Efflux Pump
2. Drug Inhibition
3. Mutation of Binding Sides
(2) NPs SYNTHESIS BY MICROFLUIDICS
Y- Shape Microfluidic Chip
PLGA (L:G 50:50) Mw: 66 kDa
Hydrophobic Drug (Curcumin – CURC)
PLA/PEG (L:mPEG 75:25) Mw: 31 kDa
(3) DRUG DELIVERY SYSTEM
CURC loaded NPs
Release of NPs
Release of CURC
Infected area
NPs coating to skin patches
METHODS
• An ad hoc custom-built device was used, comprising a pumping module with two syringe
pumps and an infusion setup designed to place a Passive Herringbone Mixer (PHBM)
chip.
Figure 1: Representative scheme of a) outer and b) inner side of microfluidic chip (3).
Type of Syringes
organic phase) PLGA NPs
Terumo 5 mL 2 8 4:1 Terumo 5 mL 2 8 4:1 PLA/PEG NPs
Table 1: Drug loading into NPs and micelles.
Terumo 5 mL 2 3 3:1 Terumo 5 mL 2 3 3:1
Final Volume (mL)
Total Flow
Rate (TFR)
(mL/min)
Flow Rate Ratio (FRR)
(aqueous/
1.Physical Properties of NPs
• NPs had uniform size distribution with PDI ≤ 0.2, consistent with TEM observations.
Dₕ (nm)
/
(mV)
ζ
Figure 2: Physical features of PLGA NPs and PLA/PEG micelles.
2. Release Kinetics of NPs
Table 2: Drug loading into NPs and micelles.
Loading PLGA PLA/PEG
Curcumin 61.91 ± 1.86 13.74 ± 0.97
EE %
Payload ( % µg/mg)
2.81 ± 0.81 2.51 ± 0.57
Higher Encapsulation Efficiency (EE%)
Slower Release Rate
Figure 3: TEM images of a) PLGA NPs, b) CURC loaded PLGA NPs, c) PLA-PEG micelles, and d) CURC loaded PLA-PEG micelles.
(%)
Release
Time (h)
Figure 4: Release profiles of CURC from PLGA NPs and PLA/PEG micelles.
3. Cytotoxicity & Antimicrobial Activity
Figure 5: Cell viability (%) after 24 h treatment on NHDFs at a cell density of 3 × 10⁸ cells/mL.
(R%)
Reduction
Time (h)
Figure 6: Bacterial reduction of S.epidermidis after 72h of treatment with CURC loaded PLGA NPs with a MIC of 0.1 mg/mL.
2h
4h
PLACEBO PLGA NPs
24h
20x
20x
20x
CURCUMIN PLGA NPs
2h
4h
24h
20x
20x
20x
Figure 7: Fluorescence microscope images of placebo and CURC loaded PLGA NPs on NHDFs after 2, 4 and 24 h indicating cellular uptake.
CONCLUSION
• CURC loaded PLGA NPs were better candidates for controlled drug delivery due
to hydrophobic interactions between the drug and the polymer.
• No or slight cytotoxic effect of CURC NPs was observed on NHDFs with
progressive cellular internalization of NPs.
• The choice of polymer composition plays a key role in drug-polymer
interactions and release kinetics to achieve more controlled delivery and
improved therapeutic efficacy in regenerative medicine.
References (1) Vega-Vásquez, P. et al. Front. Bioeng. Biotechnol. 2020, 8, 2296-4185. (2) Fu, Y. S. et al. Biomed. Pharmacother. 2021, 141, 111888. (3) Chiesa et al. ,International Journal of Pharmaceutics, Volume 629, 2022, 122368, ISSN 0378-5173.
Acknowledgements “This project has received funding from the European Union’s research and innovation programme under the Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement No 101072645".