# Presenting the Actionable Guidelines for FAIR Research Software Task Force

Bhavesh Patel, Ph.D.¹, Daniel Garijo, Ph.D.², on behalf of the Actionable FAIR4RS Task Force

¹FAIR Data Innovations Hub, California Medical Innovations Institute, San Diego, CA, USA  
²Universidad Politécnica de Madrid, Spain

## Background

• Research software is a critical element of modern scientific research.

• Making it FAIR (Findable, Accessible, Interoperable, and Reusable) is crucial to support reproducibility, transparency, sustainability, and scientific progress.

• The FAIR4RS principles (2022) provide a framework to achieve this through unique identifiers, metadata, license, and more. They are now being adopted by researchers, organizations, and funders worldwide.

## Problem

• By design, the FAIR4RS principles do not provide concrete implementation steps, making them difficult for developers to apply.

• Field-specific guidelines, such as FAIR-BioRS (2023), exist but lack broad, cross-disciplinary input.

• The 2 year community survey of the FAIR4RS principles confirmed the need for generalized actionable guidelines.

## Solution

• To address that, we established the Actionable Guidelines for the FAIR Research Software (Actionable FAIR4RS) Task Force in December 2024 under the Research Software Alliance (ReSA).

• The Task Force is run by a diverse international team of researchers and research software developers from various fields (Fig. 1).

• Goal: Create actionable and domain-agnostic guidelines for implementing the FAIR4RS principles, through a comprehensive, community-driven methodology.

Figure 1. Overview of the Task Force.

Home of the Task Force

~12 active members

Location: Germany, Spain, UK, USA, etc.

Research domains: Biomedical, Data Science, Knowledge Representation, etc.

## Progress

• We began by conducting an in-depth analysis of the FAIR4RS principles and identified six key categories where actionable instructions are needed, each with a series of outstanding questions (Fig. 2).

• Six subgroups are now conducting literature reviews and community outreach to answer these questions.

• Fig. 3 illustrates the approach and preliminary findings from the subgroup working on category C5, including a preliminary list of metadata elements we believe are essential for software reuse and ways to include that metadata with software.

Figure 2. Illustration of the outcomes of task 1 of the Task Force, which consisted of understanding the requirements of each of the 17 FAIR4RS principles.

17 FAIR4RS principles → 6 main categories → Many questions!

We identified 6 categories where actionable guidelines are needed

C1. Identifier

C2. Metadata for software publication & discovery

C3. Standards for inputs & outputs

C4. Qualified references

C5. Metadata for software reuse

C6. License

Figure 3. Progress of the subgroup working on C5 - Metadata for software reuse.

2 FAIR4RS principles → 2 main questions

• R1. Software is described with a plurality of accurate and relevant attributes

• R1.2. Software is associated with detailed provenance.

• What provenance and other metadata are necessary for software reuse?

• How to provide that metadata?

Methods

• Literature review
• Personal assessment
• External feedback

Preliminary findings

Provenance metadata:
• Authors info
• Funding details

Other metadata
• Software description
• Required dependencies

How to provide:
codemeta.json

## Next Steps

• Dec 2025: Subgroups complete investigations to establish answers for outstanding questions.

• Mar 2026: Release draft guidelines for broad community feedback.

• Summer 2026: Publish the first official version of the Actionable FAIR4RS Guidelines.

• Fall 2026: Transition to a maintained, living resource that evolves with community input.

## Get Involved!

Are you a developer, maintainer, funder, or user of research software?

Email bpatel@calmi2.org to join us and help build the foundation for FAIR research software!

## Join the Task Force!

Email: bpatel@calmi2.org

Find this poster and all related references here

bit.ly/a-FAIR4RS

www.researchsoft.org/tf-actionable-fair4rs
